---
layout: "../../layouts/BlogPost.astro"
title: "Fujitsu Announces World's First 300GB 2.5” Hard Disk Drive"
description: ""
pubDate: "2006-12-13T12:36:04.000Z"
heroImage: ""
tags: ["Tech"]
slug: "fujitsu-announces-worlds-first-300gb-25-hard-disk-drive"
---

Fujitsu Computer Products of America, Inc., one of the world's leading suppliers of innovative computer products including hard disk drives, peripherals and biometric security solutions, today announced as part of a coordinated global launch the MHX2300BT series of mobile hard disk drives (HDDs). The newest Fujitsu products feature impressive storage capacities of 250GB and 300GB, the first 2.5" PMR hard disk drives in the industry to attain these high levels of capacity. The MHX2300BT series will begin shipping in the first quarter of 2007.   Just last March, Fujitsu successfully launched the world's first 2.5" Serial ATA (SATA) hard disk drive to feature up to 200GB of storage space. Today, less than a year later, Fujitsu sets the standard even higher as it introduces its latest ultra-high capacity mobile hard disk drive series. Engineered using perpendicular magnetic recording technology, which is essential to achieving the increased capacity per platter, the new small form factor HDDs will address the growing demand for higher capacity storage solutions.  Additional benefits of the Fujitsu second generation PMR products include best-in-class low power consumption at 1.6W as well as high shock tolerance and near-silent operation. These qualities make the MHX2300BT series highly desirable for audio/video (A/V) applications such as gaming, video editing, audio recording and DVR functionality, as well as for the high-end personal computing market.  "Due to our strong focus on innovation, Fujitsu remains at the forefront in promoting advanced technologies such as perpendicular recording and SATA, while at the same time continuing to meet the industry's insatiable demand for high-capacity products," said Joel Hagberg, vice president, marketing and business development, Fujitsu Computer Products of America. "Our commitment to R&amp;D has not only spurred the development of the industry's first 2.5" 300GB capacity perpendicular hard disk drive, but it will allow Fujitsu to continue to achieve these aggressive milestones in advance of the rest of the industry."  Hard Disk Drive Specifications Fujitsu designed the MHX2300BT hard disk drive series to provide specifications that are vital for today's mobile computing applications, including: Capacity: 250/300GB Rotational Speed: 4200 RPM Interface: SATA 2.5, ATA-8 Native Command Queuing DIPM and HIPM Supported Staggered Spin Up &amp; Active LED Supported Hot Plug Best in Class Read / Write Power Consumption: 1.6W typ. Idle Power Consumption: 0.5W typ. Track to Track Seek Time: 1.5ms typ. Host Transfer rate: 150MB/s max. Operating Shock: 300G (2ms)
